This is a list of student clubs in Manipal University Jaipur.


Name : ACM (Association for Computing Machinery)
Description : MUJ ACM is the Manipal University Jaipur chapter of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), the world's largest educational and scientific computing society. MUJ ACM is a student-run organization that aims to promote computer science culture and provide opportunities for students to learn and grow in the field. MUJ ACM organizes a variety of events throughout the year, including codeathons, hackathons, workshops, seminars, and webinars. These events provide students with the opportunity to learn new skills, solve challenging problems, and network with other computer science enthusiasts.


Name : IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers)
Description :The Manipal University Jaipur chapter of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) is a student-run organization that aims to promote electrical engineering and computer science culture and provide opportunities for students to learn and grow in the field. It is a multi-faceted chapter, embodying IEEE Computer Society MUJ, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society MUJ, IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques Society MUJ and IEEE Women in Engineering MUJ. It has grown into a vibrant and active community of engineering enthusiasts.


Name : TURING SAPIENS
Description : Turing Sapiens is the official technical club of Manipal University Jaipur, which represents the student branch for the School of Computing and Information technology. The club aims to strengthen the technical core of the college and the skill sets of its student community.


Name : APERTURE
Description : Aperture is the official Digital Arts Society of Manipal University Jaipur. It is a student-run organization that aims to promote digital arts culture and provide opportunities for students to learn and grow in the field.


Name : RANDOMIZE
Description : Randomize(); is the official computing club of Manipal University Jaipur. It is a student-run organization that aims to promote computing culture and provide opportunities for students to learn and grow in the field.Randomize(); was founded in 2013 by a group of students who were passionate about computing. The club has since grown to become one of the largest and most active computing clubs in India.


Name : CHOREOGRAPHIA
Description : MUJ Choreographia is a student-run organization at Manipal University Jaipur that aims to promote dance culture and provide opportunities for students to learn and grow in the field. The club was founded in 2014 by a group of students who were passionate about dance.


Name : THE MUSIC CLUB(TMC)
Desciption : MUJ The Music Club (TMC) is one of the most popular and active student clubs at Manipal University Jaipur. It is a platform for students who are passionate about music to come together, learn, grow, and perform.