Student Counselling

Counselling is a service provided by mental health professional to help people who are looking for assistance in dealing with the issues they are having trouble with. Counselling is a process where clients are helped in dealing with their personal and interpersonal conflicts. It allows an individual to have an opportunity to improve upon their understanding of themselves, including their pattern of thoughts, behaviours, feelings and the ways in which these may have been problematic in their lives. It also helps to examine how to tap into existing resources or develop new ones that enhance their lives and relationships. At Manipal University Jaipur under the Directorate of students' Welfare works Student Support System. Counselling is one of the major pillars supporting the holistic development of the students. Apart from personal counselling we have an array of activities and awareness programs to engage the students and support them with mental health issues.


Timings : 9:00 AM - 8:00PM (Monday, Wednesday and Friday) and 9:00 AM - 6:00 PM (Tuesday and Thursday)
Email: students.counsellor@jaipur.manipal.edu
Contact: 0141-3999100 Ext:812
Counselling room : Room No. 001 and Room No. 023 at AB1
Counsellors : Ms. Devanshi Padaliya, Dr Rimpy Sharma, Ms. Vandna Kabra


How to handle exam stress?

Examination Stress is an uneasiness or apprehension experienced before, during, or after an examination. It is very common among college and university students. But some students find that this interferes with their learning to such an extent that it can reduce the efficiency of performance. In order to help you to reduce this stress up to a manageable level, we give here practical guidelines to handle the time leading up to examinations, as well as some tips about the examinations themselves. If you haven't geared up for the examinations yet and are wondering how to start, please read on, the tips given here might be of help. Considering the seemingly huge amount of course material to be covered in the limited span of time, you might find yourself in a state of tension and restlessness. But looking at it the other way round, this restlessness simply shows your concern towards the examinations and the fact that you have started caring for your academics; and this is a definitely the sign of a good start. Before the exam: Look after yourself - for example, get enough rest, eat reasonably, take a bath and be fresh. Arrive at the exam hall comfortably in time; use these few minutes to do some simple relaxation and breathing exercises. During the exam: Start answering the paper with the question that you know the best. Do not rush through the test; wear a watch and check it frequently as you pace yourself. Focus on answering the question, not on your grade or others' performance. Relax yourself; tell yourself I can be anxious later, now is the time to take the exam. If allowed, drink water or go to the bathroom. After the exam: Your attitude after the exam is also important especially if you have another exam. The following points will be helpful to you to maintain your calm and composure after the exam. Reward yourself for having tried. It is a good idea to decide what you are going to do after the exam. You can leave others to do the post-mortem of the paper outside the Lecture Hall, while you go and do something more enjoyable as already planned or take rest. If you have another exam and you are not satisfied with your performance in the first exam, you may get stressed and spoil your other exam as well. In such a case, realize that you cannot change what has already happened, have confidence in how you performed. There is no point discussing your paper with anyone, just forget it. Just relax and sleep for some time, say, half-an-hour and then start fresh for the next exam.


Having suicidal thoughts?

The following are common thoughts and feelings associated with suicide :
Extreme self hatred : "You don't deserve to live."
Personalized hopelessness : "Nothing matters any more. You should just kill yourself. "
Pushing away friends and family : "What's wrong with you? Look at all this trouble you’re causing the people who love you."
Isolation : "Just be by yourself. You are better off alone."
Thoughts of not belonging : "You don't fit in anywhere."
Thoughts of being a burden to others : "You’re just dragging everyone down. You are such a burden; they would be better off without you."

The following are common behaviors that indicate suicide risk :
Past attempts.
Disrupted sleep patterns.
Increased anxiety and agitation.
Outbursts of rage or low frustration tolerance.
Risk taking behavior.
Increased alcohol or drug use.
Sudden mood changes for the better.
Any talk or indication of suicidal ideation or intent, planning or actual actions taken to procure a means.

Take these immediate actions :
Step 1: Promise not to do anything right now. Even though you are in a lot of pain right now, give yourself some distance between thoughts and action. Make a promise to yourself: “I will wait 24 hours and won’t do anything drastic during that time.” Or, wait a week. Thoughts and actions are two different things—your suicidal thoughts do not have to become a reality. There is no deadline, no one’s pushing you to act on these thoughts immediately. Wait. Wait and put some distance between your suicidal thoughts and suicidal action.
Step 2: Avoid drugs and alcohol Suicidal thoughts can become even stronger if you have taken drugs or alcohol. It is important to not use nonprescription drugs or alcohol when you feel hopeless or are thinking about suicide.
Step 3: Make your home safe Remove things you could use to hurt yourself, such as pills, knives, razors, or firearms. If you are unable to do so, go to a place where you can feel safe. If you are thinking of taking an overdose, give your medicines to someone who can return them to you one day at a time as you need them.
Step 4: Don’t keep these suicidal feelings to yourself Many of us have found that the first step to coping with suicidal thoughts and feelings is to share them with someone we trust. It may be a family member, friend, therapist, member of the clergy, teacher, family doctor, coach, or an experienced counselor at the end of a helpline. Find someone you trust and let them know how bad things are. Don’t let fear, shame, or embarrassment prevent you from seeking help. And if the first person you reach out to doesn’t seem to understand, try someone else. Just talking about how you got to this point in your life can release a lot of the pressure that’s building up and help you find a way to cope.
Step 5: Take hope – people DO get through this Even people who feel as badly as you are feeling now manage to survive these feelings. Take hope in this. There is a very good chance that you are going to live through these feelings, no matter how much self-loathing, hopelessness, or isolation you are currently experiencing. Just give yourself the time needed and don’t try to go it alone.


Do i need help?

At various times, all of us have experienced distress or felt overwhelmed, sometimes because of certain events, and at other times for no specific reason known to us. And very often, we do need help. If you identify with any of the following statements, you should definitely seek professional advice :
Most of the time these days, I don’t feel like myself.
I’ve lost someone (or something) important to me and I’m having trouble coping with it.
Something terrible happened to me and I can’t seem to put it behind me.
I feel sad and/or angry most of the time.
I feel unwell but the doctor says that I’m healthy.
I’m sleeping much less/more than I usually do and it’s affecting my life.
I don’t enjoy the things that I used to earlier.
I have some disturbing thoughts that I cannot seem to control.
I’m having trouble concentrating.
I’m trying to change something about myself but I’m not able to.
I have recurrent stress and anxiety about my academic work.
I feel socially isolated and disconnected.
I find it hard to manage my daily life without consuming certain substances.
I feel that I am on social networking and/or gaming sites more than I should be.


Feeling Depressed?

Depression is an illness characterized by persistent sadness and a loss of interest in activities that you normally enjoy, accompanied by an inability to carry out daily activities, for at least two weeks. In addition, people with depression normally have several of the following: a loss of energy; a change in appetite; sleeping more or less; anxiety; reduced concentration; indecisiveness; restlessness; feelings of worthlessness, guilt, or hopelessness; and thoughts of self-harm or suicide. Something that can happen to anybody. Not a sign of weakness.Treatable, with talking therapies or antidepressant medication or a combination of these.If any you relate to any of the above mentioned content you need to make an appointment with a psychological counsellor.


Feeling lonely?

It is a cliché that we can feel lonely - even particularly lonely - in a crowd. Unfortunately, it is one that is only too true and all too common at university. Here, surrounded by people of a similar age and, supposedly, with lots in common we can nevertheless feel wretchedly isolated and awkward. This is made worse by the sight of others who seem perfectly at ease, are rapidly making friends and are becoming embedded in groups from which you feel excluded or only tolerated on the margins. Feelings of Loneliness Occur to us all - Sometimes we are thrown into that sense of uniqueness and the awareness that no-one can ever fully know and understand us. In fact, occasionally we may feel that we do not even understand ourselves! This is because we are constantly changing in response to the situations and relationships that we develop. Ways of Coping Loneliness is a normal part of human experience. It can even have positive effects, if it does not last for too long - for example, it can lead to the discovery and development of personal resources and, therefore, to a greater sense of your own independence. If it becomes long-lasting, however, it can cause great distress and hurt. Here are some suggestions for ways you may find helpful in breaking the pattern of your loneliness:Self-Acceptance: You may blame yourself for your loneliness wishing you were different ('If only I were ...'); it can be helpful to realize that it may be your situation you need to change, rather than your personality or appearance. You are all right, the situation isn't - and you can do something about that. Making Friends Accept your own preferences: You may prefer one-to-one friendships to group contact; you may prefer quieter meeting places to pubs or clubs.Choose activities you are genuinely interested in: Whatever these are (societies, sports, voluntary work, arts, music, etc.), you will meet people there with whom you have something in common.Risk taking the initiative: Your reticence can be misunderstood by others as aloofness or unfriendliness - for example, if you are feeling lonely in a lecture, avoiding eye-contact and pretending you're fine by absorbing yourself in a book or paper, you may be putting others off from contacting you. If you stop and look around you, you may well find others sitting on their own, who will welcome a smile from you and, perhaps, an offer of coffee in the break. Build upon your relationship by being a good friend: Listening carefully, being responsive and showing understanding and even challenging sometimes, if it feels appropriate. (Deepening a few relationships can be more rewarding than pursuing many casual ones.). Sources of Help A research done showed that students, who had been feeling lonely, said that the greatest help was talking about their feelings to someone who listened, cared, understood and accepted them. So if you look around yourself, you can always find your batch mates, seniors, counselling service members, your parents, faculty, who are always ready to help you. Don't have any hesitation in talking to them and taking their help.